[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Thinking Allowed,
Conversations on the Leading
Edge of Knowledge and Discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today we are going to explore
the path of the Shaman
and Healer.
My guest is Dr.
Alberto Villoldo who
is the founder and director
of The Four Winds Society.
He is also author
of numerous books,
including "Shaman,
Healer, Sage,"
and "Dance of the Four Winds,"
as well as "Realms of Healing."
Welcome, Alberto.
>> Thank you, Jeffrey.
Good to be with you.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you.
One of the things that you
point out with regard to healing
is that many people will take
a series of weekend courses,
or programs, on energy
healing, energy medicine
and come to the work
with the approach
that they're healing
with love and compassion.
And they may not appreciate
that sometimes healing
can have negative consequences.
>> Oh, absolutely.
You have to be very careful.
You're dealing with very
powerful energies here, Jeff.
And one of the things
that I differentiate in
"Shaman, Healer, Sage"
is the difference
between healing and curing--
that we're in the
business of healing.
Doctors are in the
business of curing.
Oftentimes, tremendous
cures happen
from healing where you
access a state of wellness,
where you experience infinity
and communion with all of life.
Very frequently, it results
in extraordinary cures,
but we're in the
business of healing.
I've had many people
come into my office who
have been to an energy healer
to have healing on their tumor.
And they've had laying
on of hands, or energy
sent to the tumor, only to have
it spread throughout the body.
>> Just the opposite of
what should have happened.
>> Oh, yeah.
Because cancer loves energy.
It loves energy like
it loves blood flow.
And, for example, when you're
healing bone, a fracture--
my mother at 78 broke her leg--
when you're doing
bone healing, you
want cell division to increase
very rapidly for bone to regrow
and bond together again.
When you're working
with a cancer,
you want the opposite process.
You want cell division to slow
down or to stop altogether.
>> Well, many healers would
say that they don't concern
themselves with these
physiological issues.
They pray to God and ask for
what is best for the patient.
>> Right, sure.
And imagine if your brain
surgeon did that, too.
I think that that's, oftentimes,
a lack of responsibility
on the healer's part
because they are still
healing the illness, which is a
very Western model of healing.
It's allopathic medicine.
Instead of giving 10
milligrams of medication,
we're doing 10
minutes of energy.
In our healing
practices that I speak
about in "Shaman, Healer,
Sage," we do systemic healing--
not symptomatic, but
in the whole system.
So we help disinhibit
the immune response
so that the person's body comes
back into health very quickly.
>> One of the things that you
point out is that many times
in a conventional society
terrible things happen to each
other in the name of love.
>> Yes.
>> And, similarly, people who
are drawn to be healers and may
be motivated by what they
think is love and compassion--
>> Well, that love is what got
them into their last disastrous
marriage, too, or not into
having children that they do
not communicate with.
So, for the Shaman, love is
something that you must purify.
Even if we go to
our Christian roots,
we find that the
love of God goes
through a process of
purification, of alchemy,
before it becomes a
vessel capable of holding
that pure love of creation.
For the Shaman,
it's the same thing.
So to use the excuse that "God
will take care of the details.
I don't have to worry about it"
can result in a lot of damage--
tremendous amount of damage--
because energy organizes
matter in the same way that
the energy fields of a magnet
will organize iron
filings on top of it.
And when you bring new
energy into a system,
you're reorganizing the body.
>> In other words, these
techniques are indeed very
powerful.
But what you see are
people using them
in our culture who haven't
had adequate training.
>> And, in effect
for the Shaman,
this would be sorcery
or black magic.
>> Even though it may
be well-intentioned.
>> With the best
intentions, of course--
with the best intentions.
And it's something
that we have to be
very cautious of in the
West because there is
such a rampant abuse of power.
And we have individuals
who are very psychically
opened but very poorly trained.
It's like being born
with a musical talent
but not developing that--
not learning the scales
and learning to play the piano.
That's where the
greatest harm can come.
>> And we don't hear of people
being harmed too much by bad
musicians.
>> No, we don't.
And we certainly don't have any
research about the healers that
are not properly trained,
but I see them in my office.
I see their patients.
>> Well, there was an
interesting study I'm aware
of, Dr. Bernard Grad did
at McGill University.
He called it the
"brown thumb" effect,
in which he asked
people who were
in-patients at a
psychiatric unit
to do some healing on plants.
These are depressed people.
And the plants got worse.
>> Yes.
But, you know, in
"Shaman, Healer, Sage,"
what I've sought to do is
to translate an ancient
methodology, a 100,000-year-old
methodology of the Americas
of our people, into
contemporary healing methods.
>> This is a
synthesis of your own.
>> Well, it's a synthesis of
my last 25 years in the field
but of a discipline that goes
back 5,000 years in the oral
tradition and earlier.
>> I want to come back to this
point because I have heard
and, in previous interviews,
talked to people about
the Andean priesthood.
And they would say, well, it's
a 10,000-year-old tradition.
Your understanding is that
it's 100,000 years old.
And, if I recall
correctly, it actually
goes back to before
modern biological humans.
>> Well, the tradition is--
if you look at the
archaeological record, which
is changing all the
time, by the way,
there were recent
discoveries of pyramids
north of Lima, the
capital of Peru,
that date the Americas'
civilizations pyramid builders,
1,500 years earlier
than we thought--
>> I recall reading about that.
>> --to the same time that
that the pyramids in Egypt were
being built. But the oral
tradition speaks about
the beginning of time itself--
the beginning of time.
Now, when does time begin?
And, if you look at the
Christian literature
of 200 years ago, time
began 6,000 years ago.
The oral tradition is
historic but not historical.
So the archaeological
record tells us
that the earliest Americans
are probably 30,000 years old.
But they migrated from
China, from Tibet, from Asia.
So you can still track the oral
tradition before you arrived--
before you crossed the land
bridge into the Americas.
And they brought with
them healing practices--
their luminous
healing practices--
where they speak about fixing
things before they're born,
about clearing imprints in
the luminous energy field--
in this aura--
that surrounds the
physical body before it
has a chance to organize
illness in the physical body.
>> Now, this information that
you're imparting came to you
through your teachers in Peru.
Other writers who have claimed
to have studied with Shamans
haven't been as
explicit as you have
been about who
these teachers are
and how their teachings can
be independently verified.
>> I think that's
essential in this work.
That's one of the
problems with Carlos'--
>> Carlos Castaneda whose book
sold millions has been largely
debunked by scholars.
>> Where you can't-- he doesn't
tell you where his teachers are
or where they live.
No one knows them but him.
And I think it's important
to have this knowledge be
independently verifiable, which
is why I chronicle and speak
about my mentors
and my teachers.
And other researchers have gone
and drawn their own conclusions
about these healing practices.
>> Well, one of the
important things, I think,
about the training that you
experienced with them was that
they didn't just impart
to you information.
They took you through processes
that literally changed your--
it would be superficial
for me to say
changed your personality.
>> Well, it did that in
the process, as well.
And it healed-- it healed me,
as well in some very deep ways.
But this is a
tradition, Jeff, that
says that there's a
difference between information
and knowledge.
That information is
what we cultivate,
we harvest in the West.
Knowledge is what
the Shaman seeks.
Information is knowing
that water is H2O.
Knowledge is being
able to make it rain.
Information is being
able to diagnose disease.
Knowledge is being able to
heal it-- not only to name it,
but to heal it.
>> Many people today are aware
of what the Hindus called
the chakras, luminous centers
of whirling energy associated,
perhaps, with different glands
or different parts of the body.
And you found a very similar
teaching to that in the Andes.
>> You know, our students
in our Light Body training--
because what I'm doing now is
dedicating myself to training
Western Shamans--
they say to me, Alberto, I
thought the chakras were Hindu.
And I look at them
and I ask them,
I thought the kidneys
were European.
If it's part of our luminous
nature, it's universal.
>> Alberto, we're going
to take a short break.
We'll be back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're back.
I'm talking with Dr.
Alberto Villoldo, author
of "Shaman, Healer, Sage."
And, just before our break, we
were talking about the chakras
and how we might associate
them with the Hindu culture.
But you're suggesting
that they have
what we could call
philosophically
an ontological reality.
>> Precisely, they certainly do.
And they're called
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
in Spanish, "eyes of light."
And let me describe
the chakras to you
because they're an important
part of our energy anatomy,
of our luminous anatomy.
The chakras are spinning
vortexes of energy
that are funnel-shaped.
And the mouth of the funnel
rests about two inches outside
of our body.
And the narrow end of the
funnel goes into the body
and connects directly
with the spinal cord.
So it informs our
neurophysiology
directly and immediately.
And it organizes our
physical, our psychological,
our spiritual reality.
>> And this is something that
you yourself have seen and have
shared--
>> I have experience.
And we train our
students in learning
to perceive the luminous
systems of the body.
For example, the
meridians of acupuncture
are called "rivers of light"
in the Shamanic traditions.
And I remember the
first time that I
saw a medicine man working
on a woman who had asthma.
And he was working on the
exact acupuncture points
that you use to treat asthma.
And I say to him,
you know acupuncture?
And he says, acupuncture?
He says, well, it's an
ancient tradition from China.
And he goes, China?
And he says, no, no.
My grandmother taught me to
see these "rivers of light"
that flow down along the
skin through the body.
And whenever the
light is blocked,
I stimulate it until the
light flows freely again.
>> In fact, you have a
fascinating story about how
this fellow took lipstick.
>> Well, I couldn't believe it.
You know, my training
has been scientific.
So I said, show me.
So he had me take all my
clothing off down to my shorts,
and we found his
wife's lipstick--
this is her only
lipstick, which is
what got us in trouble later.
And he drew these
meridians on my body,
and they coincided
perfectly with the meridians
of Chinese medicine.
And, even today, the most
brilliant acupuncturists
in Japan are blind.
So they're not
deceived by sight.
But these are universal
structures, Jeff.
>> And you use the term
perceive, rather than see.
This is something we
perceive with the inner eye.
>> Yes, we perceive with the
inner eye and not with these
eyes that are so limited that
are in the service of ordinary
reality.
>> And, yet, it's not--
what you're saying,
it's not imagination, that
there's something objective
that we can perceive here with
the inner eye from culture
to culture will be described
with a certain amount
of precision.
>> Well, the same
references are--
you find them in the
Maoris in New Zealand.
You find them among
the Buddhists.
The Buddhists depicted
with this aura of light
around him, the Christ with
a halo of the apostles.
Now, was this halo
around Christ a metaphor
for some inner state?
And, in the West,
what we have taken
the liberty of doing
is reinterpreting what,
in every other tradition around
the world, is an experience,
a literal perceivable
experience.
>> Well, it's a source
of major debate, I think,
amongst scholars
of mysticism today.
And you're taking a
side in this debate.
>> Oh, I have taken a side--
I took a side 20 years ago
when I threw my recorder
and notepad into the
fire and realized
that I had to experience
the training of the Shaman
and not just take
notes about it.
And today, we train our students
in our healing, the Light Body
School, we're training
physicians, and nurses,
and social workers,
and laypeople,
and carpenters to perceive
the luminous energy field
and to become a healing
influence in the world.
>> Well, that's a
remarkable training.
Some people might say
you're training people
in a form of illusion.
>> And they certainly
might say that.
And it's-- they're
entitled to their opinion.
But the important thing
is the results here--
is the results.
See, the Shaman describes
four levels of engagement
with reality.
And I want to describe
them briefly to you.
The first one is the
body or the literal--
the physical level.
And these are like these
Russian nesting dolls
that enfold each other and
inform the ones within them.
So the body--
>> The physical body.
>> --physical body
or physical reality,
the mind that creates
our reality, the soul,
if you would, or the
level of the mythic--
the mythological-- and
then the essential level,
the level of spirit.
Each of these informing
the ones above.
What the Shaman can do and what
we train our students to do
is that, if you have a pending
engagement with a heart
condition because
your mother may
have had heart disease
or your grandmother
had heart disease,
that you don't
want to do it at the literal.
>> The level of the body.
Preferably, you'll do it
at the level of the mind
where the mind can create
health in the body, not
only psychosomatic disease,
but psychosomatic health.
Or, even better, at
the level of the soul.
But, better even, at
the level of spirit
where we can clear
the blueprint that
organizes the
physical body-- this
luminous energy field that
organizes the physical body--
and that has the
blueprints of illness
and of health within it.
>> Now, you describe-- and
I like your definition very
much-- that the soul is finite,
but the spirit is infinite.
>> Yes.
The soul is personal, and
it's the business of religion
where you can save your soul.
And I may choose
not to save mine.
The spirit is one.
It's absolutely one.
My mentor-- let me describe
these four levels again--
my mentor would
say to me, Alberto,
you've spent 95% of your energy
decorating and redecorating
your psyche.
He would compare the
psyche to an oxbow lagoon
like you find in the jungle--
small oxbow lagoon-- that
is fed by the Amazon.
But that we identify with
the shores of our own lagoon.
And he would say to me, you
take the trees and the logs that
flowed up to your beach, and
you build great sand castles
with them with
beautiful palm fronts.
And then, when
something goes wrong,
the friendship doesn't turn out.
The love relationship
didn't work out.
The business arrangement--
you take all of that material
to the other end of the
beach, and you start again.
Whereas, I can put
my hand, he would
say, at the source of
that river and create
a ripple that would change the
contours of your shoreline,
or perhaps overturn your canoe,
or perhaps, if you had fallen
out of your canoe, wash
you up to the shore
and save your life with
very little effort.
>> Because he's
closer to the source.
>> He's at the source.
Now, this is quantum physics.
This is that butterfly in
Beijing that flapped its wings
and started a tropical
storm in the Caribbean,
except the Shaman
knows how to do it.
Quantum physics is only
descriptive, because you then
end up asking, which one of
the 6 million butterflies
that flapped its
wings in Beijing when?
And how do I find it?
And the Shaman knows the
source of that river.
>> Now, you're
taking a metaphor--
the butterfly metaphor-- from
chaos theory and complexity
theory, which is linked
to quantum physics.
>> Precisely, yes.
And we have a similar
metaphor, of course,
in the medicine
traditions of working
very close to the source.
>> And when you're
close to the source,
the smallest little movements
can cause major effects.
>> Major, major effects because
the ratio of energy to matter
changes by a factor of 10
or 100 as you switch levels.
>> And being close to the
source, as you said earlier,
I think implies being
close to spirit.
>> Being one with spirit.
>> One with spirit.
And, if I'm correct,
being one with spirit
implies this very serious
process of purification.
>> Involves, yes, a very
serious process of purification
and involves truly an act of
love and an act of courage
because most people that will
come to see a Healer want you
to fix them.
They want you to take it away.
And they don't want to
change the relationship,
or change the job, or
change the toxic history,
or heal emotionally
or spiritually.
So a healing journey
is a very big journey.
And it's one that,
whoever embarks upon it,
I salute them for the courage.
>> Well, typically,
in our literature,
the Shaman is one who responds
to illness and sees illness
as a calling--
a calling to go through this
ordeal of transformation.
>> The training of the Shaman
is a training of the wounded
healer that in the process
of healing herself,
what has lived within her as
a source of wounding, of pain,
of weakness is transformed
into a source of strength
and compassion, so that I know
what it is to hurt because I
know that I have hurt.
There's where my
compassion comes from.
It's not a warm, fuzzy feeling.
I know what it is
to hurt, so I can
be next to someone
who's dying and not
have to face fear
of my own death.
>> And when you describe the
training that you went through,
some of the things that your
teachers asked you to do seem
frightening, almost inhuman.
Like, I recall one
instance when you
were asked to dive into
an icy cold pool of water
in a mountain glacier
in the middle of winter
naked, and dive to the
bottom, and kiss the ice.
>> Well, I had my
bathing suit on.
But it was still very cold.
And they were
testing my resolve,
of course-- testing my resolve
because they didn't want
me to waste their
time to indulge
a curious Westerner
but someone who
would become a bridge, in
effect, for these traditions.
And one of the things
that I learned shortly
after that very cold
swim was the notion
that there are
energies that we carry
that do not belong
to us, which is
a very foreign one in the West.
In psychology, you
assume everything
you find within
you belongs to you,
and you have to
integrate and accept.
The Shaman calls it sorcery.
In the jungle, they call
it sorcery that somebody
who is wishing you ill,
or who is angry with you,
or feels that you
have betrayed them,
that that energy can penetrate
your luminous defenses,
and contaminate your luminous
energy field in a way
that a virus does in the body,
and that these energies have
to be extracted.
>> Or it might even be the
spirit of a departed loved one.
>> It could be the spirit of--
frequently, in fact, it is.
I see many people
in my office who
think that they're
done with their mother
when she passes away.
And her spirit who has not had
closure is now afflicting her.
>> Well, we're opening up a
vast area of discussion here.
Unfortunately, we're
almost out of time.
It's a shame that we
can't spend more time
on the topic of soul
retrieval, which
I know is one of your
major interests as well.
>> That's one of the
fundamental healing practices
for a medicine person.
>> Not only do we seem to
take on foreign energy,
but we often leave our own.
>> We lose one of our own.
Adage, when we had a traumatic
event at the age of 7.
>> Alberto, but we
are out of time.
And I'm sorry for that.
It's been a great pleasure--
>> It's wonderful to
have been with you, Jeff.
>> --to with you and share in
the depth of your knowledge
and experience.
Thanks so much.
>> Thank you.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]